Let's continue with our investigations of embeddings vectors with another analysis that is different
from, but related to looking at the angle of differences between vectors.
What I will show you in this video is called path length, and it quantifies the distance that the embeddings
vector travels as it passes from one layer to the next.
When I switch to code, you will see that we get some really stunning and thought provoking beautiful
findings.
But unfortunately when I tried to replicate it, the pattern will turn out to be not universal, or
at least more nuanced than a simplistic interpretation.
I will start by defining the concept of path length in linear algebra, and then I will discuss it in
the context of embeddings vectors in language models.
So imagine these are two vectors on this graph.
Now you can think of these as lines coming from the origin.
But you can also think of these as being two coordinates at these two arrowheads.
So if we want to know what is the distance, what is the length of the path to get from one coordinate
to the next, you can use Euclidean geometry to calculate that distance.
And when we think of these vectors in the linear algebra sense, then we can think about the path length
from one vector to another by first thinking about the line or the vector that connects the head of
one vector to the head of the other vector, and then to measure the length of that line.
This is the path length here.
You can take the difference between the two vectors.
So literally one vector minus the other.
And then you calculate the norm of that vector.
Remember that the norm of a vector is the square root of the sum of the squared elements.
So that's equivalent to Euclidean distance between these two arrowheads here.
Okay.
So this diagram was a bit generic just to illustrate the concept in math in linear algebra.
Of course we cannot really draw these token embeddings vectors because they're just too high dimensional.
But imagine that this graph shows the embeddings vectors for one specific token as it traverses through
the transformer blocks.
So T1 would be the vector for a given token when it comes out of the first transformer block.
And then T2 is the output of the second transformer block, and so on.
And here I'm depicting five transformer blocks for the same token.
Of course, you know that the goal of a transformer block is to take a token embeddings vector, add
a little bit of a rotation or a stretching or contraction according to the context that the token is
presented in, and then pass it along to the next transformer block.
So the idea is that when a transformer block has a really big impact on a token, then the path length
from the output of one transformer block to the next should be really large.
In contrast, if a transformer block doesn't really modify a token embedding vector that much, maybe
it adds a tiny little adjustment.
Then we would expect the path length across the two transformer blocks to be quite small.
And that's really the idea of the analysis that I will show you in this video.
So we're really just measuring the magnitude of the differences between the token embeddings vectors
across different transformer blocks.
So here is what I'm going to show you in the Python demo.
I'll start by importing several different versions of GPT two.
Now the reason for loading in several models here is that we want to see if the results that we get
from the small version are reproduced in these larger versions.
Next, I will tokenize a bit of text that I copied from the Wikipedia page on Nietzsche.
I'm sure you've heard of this guy.
He is one of the most important and influential philosophers of the past few centuries.
He also suffered from several physical and mental problems, but he definitely had a lot of style when
it came to growing mustaches and having those mustaches match his necktie.
So at least he had that going for him.
Uh, sadly, Nietzsche was mostly ostracized and ignored by his colleagues during his lifetime, and
his writings and his intellectual prowess only became influential after he died.
Anyway, I am going to push through some of this text through the model, get the hidden state activations
for all of the transformer layers, and then calculate the path length changes from one layer to the
next, and then also calculate the cumulative path length that is just the cumulative sum over all of
the individual path lengths.
And that's what you see on the left panel of this figure here.
So the x axis is the transformer block.
The y axis is the total path length.
So the cumulative path length and each dotted line in here is for a different token in the sequence.
So in this paragraph, of course, these values keep increasing because lengths are non-negative quantities,
and we're just summing up more of them as we go through the model.
And this scatter plot over here shows a really remarkable correlation.
So we have path length on the y axis.
And this is actually not the cumulative path length.
It's just the change from the penultimate transformer block to the final transformer block.
So 11 to 12.
And then on the x axis is the final logit at the output of the model for the token that comes next.
So next token prediction.
So basically larger numbers here means that the model is giving a stronger activation to the true next
token the real token that came next.
Now this is a fantastic finding because it means that the shorter the path length, which means the
closer the embeddings vectors are to each other from layer 11 to 12, the more likely the model is to
make an accurate prediction of the subsequent token.
Now, all of these data here is just for the small version of GPT two.
So what I did next was repeat this analysis for all four of the models or the versions of GPT two.
I'm not showing those results here, because I think it's more interesting to see them in context of
the code.
But suffice it to say that this very nice pattern sort of replicates, but not entirely.
Anyway, let's switch to code and continue exploring and discussing.
Here are the libraries that I will use here.
This is the GPT two tokenizer.
I've already imported that.
And here's the list of models organized as a dictionary.
And then I import all of the models from the dictionary and switch them to eval mode.
And I'm putting them all on the GPU as well, mainly because of this really big model.
All of this code you've seen I think several times before in this course.
So let's so I've already run this because this takes several minutes to load in.
Okay.
So now, uh, until the end of this code file, I'm only going to be working with the small version
of GPT two.
I will tell you, when we get to the other versions, that's going to happen later.
So here is this paragraph.
Here is the direct URL, although you'd also get it just by googling for Nietzsche.
So yeah, Nietzsche was a widely influenced philosopher, blah blah blah.
You can see quite a bit of text here.
It's just one paragraph.
Okay, so then I tokenize this, move it to the GPU, and I run this through the small version of the
model and I get the hidden states equals true.
Okay.
So that should be pretty fast to run.
Actually, don't even need this line here.
I think that's just copied from something else.
This is, of course specifying the labels so that we can calculate the losses, but I'm not using that
for this particular code file.
Okay.
Here is arguably the most important code cell in this code demo.
This is where I'm going to be calculating the path length from each token to the next token in the layer.
Or actually the way I set it up is each token relative to the previous.
Okay.
So let's see here I'm looping over all of the tokens in the text.
And now I'm looping over all of the layers.
Now notice that I'm starting from layer one.
And that's because I am calculating relative to layer zero here.
So here is.
So now actually some of this code will look familiar from the previous few videos where we were calculating
the angle of the embeddings vector from the current relative to the previous layer, the previous transformer
block.
So very similar here.
So I get the current activation vector for.
So from the hidden states for this particular layer this is the first sequence this particular token.
And then we have all of the embeddings dimensions.
So this gives me one vector for the current processing of the of one token.
And then this is exactly the same token exactly the same vectors but just one layer backwards in time
if you will.
Okay.
So now exactly as I showed in the slides a few moments ago, we just subtract the two vectors.
That gives us the vector that connects these two points.
So the two heads of these arrows, if you think of these as being vectors that start from the origin
and go to these coordinates.
And then I calculate their norm and then bring it back to the CPU.
And that is called path length for this layer.
And for this token.
Okay.
And then here probably more correct is to call this the logit.
So here I'm getting the next token prediction.
So here is the output logits.
This is not the hidden states that I'm accessing here.
But actually the logits at the very end of the model immediately before we would do a embeddings and
token selection.
So I get all of the logits again for this token.
All of the tokens in the vocab.
So the size of this vector here is going to be 50,256 or 57, whatever it is.
And then what I'm looking for is the logits for the next token.
So this is how strong does the model weight the output for the token that should come next.
So next token prediction.
And then I'm storing that variable here.
Okay.
So then so that is the for loop.
And that's the analysis here.
So loop over all of the tokens loop over all of the layers.
And now I'm calculating the cumulative path length.
That is the dotted line plot that I showed in the slides.
Very simple to calculate you just use the numpy function cumulative sum.
And because this is a matrix, you need to specify the dimension along which you want to calculate the
cumulative sum.
So we want to calculate the cumulative sum along the first dimension which is the layers.
So axis equals zero.
And then here I'm setting the first one to be Nan.
That's basically because the first value is zero because yeah this is not defined for the very first
layer.
It's only defined starting from the second layer with index one.
And yeah that's because we have to subtract here.
Okay.
So this is just for convenience for plotting.
When I set this to be zero then the plot actually plots at zero.
But that's not a valid data point here.
So I'm just replacing all of these values with an Nan.
And then matplotlib will ignore those values.
Okay.
And then here is for the correlation.
So here I'm correlating the lat the token logits here for the prediction for the upcoming token with
the path length at the very end of the transformer block.
So that is the penultimate up until the ultimate or final transformer block.
This one here is because I'm skipping the first token.
You've already seen that several times.
That will come up again in a couple of videos from now in a code challenge.
But as I mentioned multiple times, in general, in analyses you will often want to skip the first token.
It looks weird.
It's often an extreme value and is not really representative of what's happening in the rest of the
text.
It can really screw up the analyses.
If you're curious, you can also, of course try it.
You just get rid of this and get rid of that, and that's fine, but I'm going to preserve that.
Okay.
Then the rest of this code here is just for the visualization.
So this is exactly the figure you've seen before in the slides.
This is a beautiful result.
Basically the less so the shorter the path length.
That means that the embeddings vector has changed relatively little from the penultimate to the final
transformer block.
And that predicts a larger magnitude.
So a larger logit for the correct token.
The token that the model should predict as the subsequent token.
Beautiful results.
Let's see if it replicates.
Okay, so what I'm doing here now is basically repeating this analysis.
So all of this code here is the same code that I just described above, but that's embedded inside another
for loop over all of the different models.
So I start by pushing the data through getting the hidden states.
And yeah this is some initializations running the analysis.
This is also exactly the same analysis you saw above.
And then yeah, printing out the correlation coefficient and drawing the figure.
And this code here is exactly this code to generate this plot.
It's just going to appear for all four of these model sizes okay.
So again this plot here is for GPT two small that is yeah that's the same thing you saw before.
Now the question is does this negative correlation Continue to be observed in the other model variants.
For the medium model, it was definitely not observed.
The correlation is very close to zero, and we don't visually see anything remarkable.
For the large version.
It does look like there is some negative correlation, but this is a little difficult to.
So when I look at this what I see is two populations.
There's this stuff over here and then there's this stuff over here.
So the global correlation is negative.
I'm not doing any statistical analysis here, but my guess is that the p value here is pretty small.
You could test that if you are interested here for the Excel.
Yeah.
Again you do see some uh tokens here that that seem to show this negative correlation.
It is technically negative.
Maybe this will also be significant because the sample size is relatively large.
Right.
Each of these dots is a token, but this is certainly not so visually compelling.
I certainly do not want to claim that this finding does not exist.
It is possible that the relationship does exist, but only for certain categories of tokens.
And then maybe this model, you see it more clearly because it's just a smaller, simpler model.
Maybe with these other models you'd see it more robustly, more visually.
Obviously, if you would find some nuanced pattern in here.
So I don't want to claim that this pattern does or does not exist, but it certainly does not easily
replicate in a very straightforward manner.
And also just to be like super duper crystal clear about this, this lack of replication or maybe nuanced
replication doesn't mean that path length is problematic per se.
It's just about this one very specific correlational analysis between the path length from the penultimate
to the final transformer block with the logits for the next token prediction.
So that is the specific finding that I had a hard time believing was really replicable.
Not that there's anything wrong with path length as an analysis method.
Path length is a nice, simple metric to measure how much a vector changes after it is adjusted.
It is different from the angle that you learned about in the previous couple of videos, because path
length also incorporates the relative lengths of the vectors.
This is something I mentioned a couple of videos ago.
For example, imagine that a vector stays in the same direction, so the angle is roughly the same,
but it gets considerably longer.
Like maybe the vector is twice as long after a transformer block, the angle change would be zero or
very close to zero, whereas the the path length would indicate a doubling.
More generally, you have already seen several times in this course that some analyses that we do seem
to generalize fairly well across models, whereas other findings either do not generalize, or perhaps
maybe they would generalize if the analysis were done in a different way, or maybe with a lot more
data.
For example, it actually is possible that the relationship between path length in the final transformer
blocks and next token prediction logits is preserved for different models, and that relationship might
be just deceptively simple in the small version of GPT two.
Maybe you would also see that relationship in larger models.
If we had a more nuanced way of selecting certain categories of tokens.
Or maybe we just need to use a larger and more diverse data set.